doc: restore missing documentation and examples that were broken (#5304)
dfinity/motoko: doc/md/fundamentals/2-actors/4-compatibility.md

Motoko tolerates Candid interface changes, since these are more likely to be intentional, breaking changes.

:::danger
Versions of Motoko using [classical orthogonal persistence](orthogonal-persistence/classical.md) will drop the state and reinitialize the counter with `0.0`, if the `dfx` warning is ignored.

For this reason, users should always heed any compatibility warnings issued by `dfx`.
:::

## Explicit migration

### Explicit migration using several upgrades
There is always a migration path to change structure of stable state, even if a direct type change is not compatible.

For this purpose, a user-instructed migration can be done in three steps:

1. Introduce new variables of the desired types, while keeping the old declarations.
2. Write logic to copy the state from the old variables to the new variables on upgrade.

    While the previous attempt of changing state from [`Int`](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/base/Int.md) to [`Nat`](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/base/Float.md) was invalid, you now can realize the desired change as follows:

>     ``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/count-v5.mo
>     ```
> 
>     To also keep the Candid interface, the `readFloat` has been added, while the old `read` is retired by keeping its declaration and raising a trap internally.
> 
> 3. Drop the old declarations once all data has been migrated:
> 
>    In versions of Motoko prior to 0.14.6, you could simply remove the old variable, or keep it but change the type to `Any`, implying that the variable is no longer useful.
> 
>     ``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/count-v6.mo
>     ```
> 
>    For added safety, since version 0.14.6 you can only discard data, or promote it to a lossy supertype such as `Any`, using a migration function:
> 
>     ``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/count-v6b.mo
>     ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/count-v5.mo
```

To also keep the Candid interface, the `readFloat` has been added, while the old `read` is retired by keeping its declaration and raising a trap internally.

3. Drop the old declarations once all data has been migrated.

In versions of Motoko prior to 0.14.6, you could simply remove the old variable or keep it but change the type to `Any`, implying that the variable is no longer useful.

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/count-v6.mo
```

For added safety, since version 0.14.6 you can only discard data or promote it to a lossy supertype such as `Any`, using a migration function:

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/count-v6b.mo
```
````

new actor.
* All other stable variables of the actor, i.e. those neither consumed nor
produced by the migration function are initialized in the usual way,
either by transfer from the upgraded actor, if declared in that actor, or, if newly declared,
by running the initialization expression in the field's declaration.
* The migration function is only executed on an upgrade and ignored on a fresh installation of the actor in an empty canister.

The migration function, when required, is declared
using a parenthetical expression immediately preceding the actor or actor class declaration, for example:

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/count-v7.mo
```

The syntax employs Motoko's new parenthetical expressions to modify ugrade behaviour.
Other parenthetical expressions of similar form, but with different field names and types, are used to modify other aspects of Motoko's execution.

You can read this as a directive to apply the indicated `migration` function
just before upgrade.

Employing a migration function offers another advantage: it lets you re-use the name of an
existing field, even when its type has changed:

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/count-v8.mo
```

> Here, we've put the migration code in a separate library:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, the migration code is in a separate library:
```

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/Migration.mo
```

The migration function can be selective and only consume or produce a subset of the old and new stable variables. Other stable variables can be declared as usual.

> For example, here, with the same migration function, we also declare a new stable variable, `lastModified` that records the time of the last update,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, here, with the same migration function, you can also declare a new stable variable, `lastModified` that records the time of the last update,
```

For compatibility, when performing an upgrade, the (post) signature of the old code must be compatible with the (pre) signature of the new code.

The migration function can be deleted or adjusted on the next upgrade.

## Upgrade tooling

`dfx` incorporates an upgrade check. For this purpose, it uses the Motoko compiler (`moc`) that supports:

-   `moc --stable-types …​`: Emits stable types to a `.most` file.

-   `moc --stable-compatible <pre> <post>`: Checks two `.most` files for upgrade compatibility.

Motoko embeds `.did` and `.most` files as Wasm custom sections for use by `dfx` or other tools.

To upgrade e.g. from `cur.wasm` to `nxt.wasm`, `dfx` checks that both the Candid interface and stable variables are compatible:

```
didc check nxt.did cur.did  // nxt <: cur
moc --stable-compatible cur.most nxt.most  // cur <<: nxt
```

Using the versions above, the upgrade from `v3` to `v4` fails this check:

```
> moc --stable-compatible v3.most v4.most
(unknown location): Compatibility error [M0170], stable variable state of previous type
  var Int
cannot be consumed at new type
  var Float
```

> With [enhanced orthogonal persistence](orthogonal-persistence/enhanced.md), compatibility errors of stable variables are always detected in the runtime system and if failing, the upgrade is safely rolled back.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With [enhanced orthogonal persistence](/docs/motoko/fundamentals/actors/orthogonal-persistence/enhanced), compatibility errors of stable variables are always detected in the runtime system and if failing, the upgrade is safely rolled back.
```

:::danger

> With [classical orthogonal persistence](orthogonal-persistence/classical.md), however, an upgrade attempt from `v2.wasm` to `v3.wasm` is unpredictable and may lead to partial or complete data loss if the `dfx` warning is ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With [classical orthogonal persistence](/docs/motoko/fundamentals/actors/orthogonal-persistence/classical), however, an upgrade attempt from `v2.wasm` to `v3.wasm` is unpredictable and may lead to partial or complete data loss if the `dfx` warning is ignored.
```

A common, real-world example of an incompatible upgrade can be found [on the forum](https://forum.dfinity.org/t/questions-about-data-structures-and-migrations/822/12?u=claudio/).

In that example, a user was attempting to add a field to the record payload of an array, by upgrading from stable type interface:

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/Card-v0.mo
```

to *incompatible* stable type interface:

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/Card-v1.mo
```

### Problem

When trying this upgrade, `dfx` issues the following warning:

```
Stable interface compatibility check issued an ERROR for canister ...
Upgrade will either FAIL or LOSE some stable variable data.

(unknown location): Compatibility error [M0170], stable variable map of previous type
  var [(Nat32, Card)]
cannot be consumed at new type
  var [(Nat32, Card__1)]

Do you want to proceed? yes/No
```
It is recommended not to continue, as you will lose the state in older versions of Motoko that use [classical orthogonal persistence](orthogonal-persistence/classical.md).
Upgrading with [enhanced orthogonal persistence](orthogonal-persistence/enhanced.md) will trap and roll back, keeping the old state.

> Adding a new record field to the type of existing stable variable is not supported. The reason is simple: The upgrade would need to supply values for the new field out of thin air. In this example, the upgrade would need to conjure up some value for the `description` field of every existing `card` in `map`. Moreover, allowing adding optional fields is also a problem, as a record can be shared from various variables with different static types, some of them already declaring the added field or adding a same-named optional field with a potentially different type (and/or different semantics).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding a new record field to the type of existing stable variable is not supported. The reason is simple: the upgrade would need to supply values for the new field out of thin air. In this example, the upgrade would need to conjure up some value for the `description` field of every existing `card` in `map`. Moreover, allowing adding optional fields is also a problem, as a record can be shared from various variables with different static types, some of them already declaring the added field or adding a same-named optional field with a potentially different type (and/or different semantics).
```

To resolve this issue, some form of  [explicit data migration](#explicit-migration) is needed.

> We present two solutions, the first using a sequence of simple upgrades, and a second, recommended solution, that uses a single upgrade with a migration function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two solutions: using a sequence of simple upgrades, or the second, recommended solution, that uses a single upgrade with a migration function.
```

> ### Solution 1 using two plain upgrades

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Solution 1: Using two plain upgrades
```

1. You must keep the old variable `map` with the same structural type. However, you are allowed to change type alias name (`Card` to `OldCard`).
2. You can introduce a new variable `newMap` and copy the old state to the new one, initializing the new field as needed.
3. Then, upgrade to this new version.

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/Card-v1a.mo
```

> 4. **After** we have successfully upgraded to this new version, we can upgrade once more to a version, that drops the old `map`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **After** you have successfully upgraded to this new version, you can upgrade once more to a version, that drops the old `map`.
```

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/Card-v1b.mo
```

`dfx` will issue a warning that `map` will be dropped.

> Make sure, you have previously migrated the old state to `newMap` before applying this final reduced version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you have previously migrated the old state to `newMap` before applying this final reduced version.
```

```
Stable interface compatibility check issued a WARNING for canister ...
(unknown location): warning [M0169], stable variable map of previous type
  var [(Nat32, OldCard)]
 will be discarded. This may cause data loss. Are you sure?
```

> ### Solution 2 using a migration function and single upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Solution 2: Using a migration function and single upgrade
```

> Instead of the previous two step solution, we can upgrade in one step using a migration function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of the previous two step solution, you can upgrade in one step using a migration function.
```

1. Define a migration module and function that transforms the old stable variable, at its current type, into the new stable variable at its new type.

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/CardMigration.mo
```

2. Specify the migration function as the migration expression of your actor declaration:

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/Card-v1c.mo
```

> **After** we have successfully upgraded to this new version, we can also upgrade once more to a version that drops the migration code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**After** you have successfully upgraded to this new version, you can also upgrade once more to a version that drops the migration code.
```

``` motoko no-repl file=../../examples/Card-v1d.mo
```

However, removing or adjusting the migration code can also be delayed to the next, proper upgrade that fixes bugs or extends functionality.

Note that with this solution, there is no need to rename `map` to `newMap` and the migration code is nicely isolated from the main code.

> <img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/844ca364-4d71-42b3-aaec-4a6c3509ee2e" alt="Logo" width="150" height="150" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
